Next, of course, will be,
always and ever,
comedy and
drama.
We call it "drama" when we cry,
we’re that simple right?
If it’s funny, it’s comedy.
If it’s sad, it’s drama.
We don’t have enough grasp
on the concept of tragedy.
Tragedy in the Greek sense.
No, tragedy has
a whole philosophy behind it.
Having a tragic flaw,
the larger than life
ambition of the character.
I don’t even think
that there are, you know,
any model of tragedies
that are being played right now
because I think people
don’t feel the need for it.
And probably because
the horrors outside in reality
are much more horrifying
than what we see on tragedy.
It’s like if you see Oedipus the King,
oh that’s already been done.
That already happened to our neighbor.
Been there done that.
It’s like what Walter Kauffmann said,
“Ever since the Holocaust,
who could top that?”
Something like that.
Like Hitler, when the strongmen came in.
It may have its own course in history,
but for the Philippines,
in Philippine context,
those kinds of plays are a category, right?
Is it comedy or drama?
This is also what determines
the audience, right?
What do Filipinos want?
Do they want to laugh?
Do they want to cry?
What are they feeling?
Again, it will depend on
what I was saying before
one, on how you view the situation.
One of the best satirists
I know is Dario Fo.
Do you know him?
You need to know him
if you’re interested in satire.
He employed the
commedia dell’arte.
He’s Italian.
F-o.
D- Dario.
A male Daria.
He’s into political satire.
Poking fun at the Italian government,
The Vatican, and so on.
There’s a play of his
that I really want to do.
"The Pope and the Witch"
Do you know that?
It’s a wonderful play.
There’s a witch.
Yes, because it’s about the Pope
using Totus Tuus during the mass
then his back suddenly hurt.
He really couldn’t move.
It became a huge problem in Vatican,
that he was like that.
Who would be able to treat him?
Until they realized
that there’s a woman
in Rome who could help,
and her work is--
but her work involves--
she has an NGO that provides
clean needles for drug addicts,
and she’s also...
going to use something
prohibited by the catholic church.
And so they had to...
secretly make her heal the Pope
because they perceived her
as someone concocting questionable things.
It’s really funny.
At the same time, in fact,
it’s one of his less acclaimed works here.
Here, it seems really obvious.
But his works are indeed
very funny, right?
I mean for him to tackle
a very serious issue
and put it in a funny light requires
a particular skill in framing the situation.
That’s really comedy.
That's what we're talking about.
There are some
who employ a dramatic style.
I guess there were more playwrights
who tackled this in the past.
Is there a Filipino playwright
who only focuses on comedy?
None, right?
I don't know--
I may be wrong,
but it’s more tensile to write
because we’re serious,
we take things seriously.
We don’t go against the grain.
Although, Al Santos’ plays
are also comedic in a way
and there are some plays
of Rene that are funny,
but mostly they are...
the mode is drama.
When I say drama,
not exaggerated drama,
but the mood you feel
is just serious.
These are different things
that you can take into consideration
because just like what I said,
this will dictate how you see the set
and how you hear the music.
- It could also be
a drama that’s funny?
Yeah.
- Will it be comedy?
I don’t know if that’s
the meaning of tragicomedy,
but that’s one of the things
I want to achieve all the time.
I would like to think
that’s what Chekhov’s plays are.
It’s not just
lugubrious
that the characters
are so ponderous like that.
Actually,
most of Chekhov’s plays
are written as comedies.
Didn’t he and Stanislavski fight
because Stanislavski thinks this is drama?
As for Alexander Payne’s films,
you can’t tell whether
they're comedy or drama
because you find it funny,
but at the same time
you find it sad.
It’s good to achieve that.
James Joyce called this jocoserious,
seeing humor
at the most crucial
dramatic moment of the character.
There’s a movie of Ulysses
that tactically explains the novel
because the novel is so dense.
It's like that.
It's also very...
At the most philosophical moment,
suddenly, someone farts.
It’s like that in Ulysses.
One moment, it’s so philosophical,
you think it’s serious, but really
it's not.
That’s what he was trying to achieve,
the mundane and the profound.
- But in doing so,
will it not break, diminish...
what's supposed to...
- If I’m part of the audience,
I’m so engrossed with this drama already,
then out of nowhere
there’s suddenly a comedic scene.
- Wouldn’t it ruin the mood?
You know that it’s a risk.
It really depends.
Watch Jack Nicholson’s
(character in) “About Schmidt”.
I know someone who couldn’t stop
crying about the film
while I couldn’t stop laughing.
In fact, Jack Nicholson
won Best Actor for it.
And his famous speech was,
“Thank you very much for this award,
for this Best Actor - Drama award,
“but all the while I thought
we were doing comedy.”
He won for drama.
You don’t know
if it’s an insult or what.
Didn’t they understand it?
But they gave him an award.
It’s a great goal in writing.
In fact, I always try to achieve that.
But of course,
you’re not always successful
as with any other
endeavour in your lives.
- Until now, is it still how we see it
or how you saw it before
because aren’t comedy
and tragedy separated
depending on
the outcome of the character?
- If it’s comedy, I’m not sure,
but they were able to meet
their objective, he got it.
- While tragedy is the failure to do so.
- Is it still like that?
What do I think?
- Yes, or is that what’s strictly right?
- Apparently, it’s changing a bit now.
- Will it just be comedy or just drama,
or how you mix between the lines?
Yes, I mean--
It’s still the same.
The definition is a fair guess.
But since you know the definition,
you try to break free from it.
When I made the adaptation--
no, not adaptation,
well, it's an adaptation in a way...
the rendition of “Merchant of Venice”
for Tanghalang Pilipino,
based from Kauffman,
I set it during the Holocaust.
That play is a comedy.
All the lovers ended up
together and so on.
But I focused on Antonio,
a homosexual,
and Shylock, a Jew.
The Nazis really hated
those two.
And so the whole context of the play
is that they are prisoners
who are made to play the roles.
So that in the end,
the Nazi characters
are happy.
And then in the end,
you see
the Jew and the homosexual
being cast in the gas chamber.
So your take is different.
It’s not comedy anymore
because a larger context
has somehow taken over.
It really depends on how
you’ll angle your camera, your lens.
Do you see something here?
Like what Brecht is saying,
his dictum in writing.
"When the character laughs,
the audience cries,"
"and when the character cries,
the audience laughs."
All of those are matters of style
and matters of taste.
It may or may not work.
You can choose different things.
And because of that,
if you start from there,
even the characters
that will suit the genre you chose,
more or less,
you can’t put
random characters
or it’ll become inappropriate.
This is where you gauge
if you’ll start there.
But if for example,
you started with
a fascination
on the character’s story,
sometimes the character’s life
or the behavior he exhibits,
sometimes it gives you
a hint or clue
that this seems like
the appropriate genre for it.
This seems suitable for a musical,
or this seems like it’s better
as a straight play, or for a one-act play.
It’s how you combine
the different elements and categories
that's what creates
the identity and uniqueness of the play.
Let’s say, for example,
you chose the category
of traditional theater.
If it’s a passion play, inevitably,
it’s going to be about Jesus Christ.
It can’t be anyone else, right?
From there,
no one else can play the role
but Jesus Christ.
But if you have
a modern interpretation,
then you can portray Jesus
as a worker
in the present time
or as a farmer
whose land is being exploited,
who's fighting by himself
while being laughed at by the military.
That’s what you can do.
That’s the possibility
of the genre you chose.
Again, it’s not restricted
to musicals or straight plays only.
You can use rap
or spoken word on your work.
That’s the style of some writers.
From there, you can already see
the way characters talk and its effect.
Especially if the musical
is sung all throughout,
it means all the lines are sung.
And so therefore,
you can mix that,
especially in an urban setting.
As opposed to
rural or even outside the country.
Maybe OFWs doing a musical.
How will you mix this?
And what are the elements
you’ll include while
balancing it all?
That’s the challenging part as a writer.
Because sometimes we tend
to get too fascinated with a genre
so we end up forgetting
what we wanted to say,
just so our characters
seem impressive.
That’s where you’ll see
the skill of the playwright
in choosing their genre.